# *"Reducing Uncertainty in the Decision-Making Process for Self-Adaptive Systems by Accounting for Tactic Volatility"*
Paper submitted to ICSE 2018

## Abstract
Self-adaptive systems use tactics to respond to changes in their environment. Tactics enable self-adaptive systems to remain effective, resilient and secure in the face of change. However, these tactics frequently have volatile attributes that can affect their predictability, dependability, and produced benefit.
This creates uncertainty in the decision-making process that may adversely impact the system’s ability to make the most optimal decision. Unfortunately, state of the art self-adaptive processes do not have any method of accounting for this volatility. To reduce these levels of uncertainty, we developed a new Tactic Volatility Aware (TVA) solution. TVA incorporates previously observed tactic volatility into the decision-making process, while also using Bayesian Ridge Regression to estimate tactic latency, which helps increase decision-making effectiveness and resiliency. We embedded TVA into the popular MAPE-K adaptation control loop, enabling it to be utilized in a variety of existing self-adaptive systems. The results of our experiments indicate that TVA is able to effectively increase the predictability and dependability of tactic execution, leading to a substantial reduction in uncertainty in the decision-making process. We also present our publicly available web-based Intelligent Simulation Service (IS3) tool. This provides researchers with both a real-world dataset that contains tactic volatility, along with an easily adaptable way to evaluate existing and self-created utility equations.